---
title: summer research
author: Anya Frazer
date: 2026-06-25
category: Jekyll
layout: post
---

Hello and welcome to my page about summer research! There are _so many_ diverse ways to spend your summer doing research as a physics undergrad and I plan to go over some here :)

A bit of background about my own summer research journey: I spent all three of my undergraduate summers doing NSF-funded research projects at three different universities. This means that the NSF (National Science Foundation) paid for my rent and travel to these universities and gave me a sizable stipend to do research over the summer! My first and last summer I did REUs (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) at Vanderbilt University and Penn State University respectively, and the summer after my sophomore year I did a PIRE (Partnership for International Research and Education) at Yamagata University in Yamagata City, Japan. I hope that this guide will give you some insight on how you can apply for career-opening opportunities like this too!

As an additional resource, I'd like to share a [summer research opportunities document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gY2LRExqct45rWbPK-ibcz2qokDdoDqKtyUv5meeHdg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.u3oq6bo1mske) that a few SPS members started a couple years ago. This document crowdsources information on summer research programs that UNC physics students have taken part in so that future students can find more opportunities. If you have done a cool research program that isn't on the list, we'd love you to add it as well!


# part i: what summer research opportunities should I apply for?

What summer research opportunities you should apply for depend heavily on your career goals. If your goal is to end up in industry following undergrad, it's incredibly helpful to complete summer internships at companies you may want to work at following graduation. This isn't a path that I have taken, so I encourage you to speak with the career center, professors, and other students who have followed this path if it is your goal.

If your career goal is to apply for PhD programs following undergrad, I got you! This is the boat I was in beginning freshman year, and I have a lot of experience from my own path and from my friends' experiences to draw from. I'll be mostly talking about summer research from this perspective from now on.

## types of summer research opportunities

Firstly, there are abundant paid and unpaid summer research opportunities at UNC. Finding a lab at UNC is the easiest guaranteed way to secure a summer research experience. If you already do research with a lab during the year, they are almost certain to at least support you to do 20 hours of unpaid research over the summer, which you can easily supplement with a part-time job. 

There are also a few ways to get paid for doing research at UNC over the summer. The easiest way is to ask your research advisor if they can pay you over the summer. It can feel like an uncomfortable question, but as long as you are respectful, most professors really want to find ways to pay their undergrads and will appreciate you asking. Additionally, most research advisors will support you to apply for a SURF at UNC, which pays a $4000 summer stipend for you to do 20 hours of research per week. A SURF application requires you to write a research proposal, which your research advisor should be able to help you talk through ideas for and edit.

There are also plenty of paid research opportunities outside of UNC, like the ones I did. When you hear people say they are "applying for REUs," they usually mean that they are applying for a combination of REUs and other similar research opportunities. Some good ones to look into include DOE SULI, NIST SURF, DAAD RISE, NSF PIRE, NSF IRES, and plent of others. These require more involved applications including essays, letters of recommendation, and a CV.

## understanding how summer research fits into your career goals

If your goal is to apply for PhD programs, it's a very good idea to try to spend at least the summers after your sophomore and junior year doing research. It's a lot harder to commit to a significant research project during the school year as an undergraduate because of all of your class commitments, so summer is the time to develop the long-term research skills that will prepare you to be a successful grad student. Of course, there are a multitude of paths to grad school and you shouldn't let _not_ having two summers of research dissuade you from applying to grad school. But if you are an underclassmen currently planning the remainder of your undergraduate career, I highly recommend making two summers of research a goal. Most successful grad school applicants I know had this.

As you can see in the section above, there are many _many_ diverse ways to fill two summers of research. The way you choose to do so depends entirely on your personal goals. For example, my goal coming into undergrad was to get as many diverse materials science research experiences as I could while still making each experience in-depth and meaningful. That exploration was very important for me personally to understand where I wanted to end up. I therefore applied for REUs all three summers of undergrad and each of them was an invaluable experience. On the other hand, I have many friends who joined a research group at their home universities in their freshman or sophomore year and spent their summers working in that group, then did an REU or SULI the summer after their junior year. From what I can tell, both options are equally competitive for grad schools, but they fulfill very different personal career goals. Alternatively, many people just stay in one lab at their home university for their entire undergrad and excel there; once again, a very different and valuable path.

# part ii: how can I put together a strong REU, PIRE, SULI, or other summer research application?

In this section, I'd like to share some of the application details that got me into my own summer research programs. Positions like REUs and SULIs are highly competitive, and there's no surefire way of putting together an application that will get you into one. That said, here are some tips that I think will make you a strong applicant.

I'll be using "REU" interchangeably with "REUs and other summer programs" from here out.

## identifying programs you are competitive for

When applying to REUs, I was very intentional about finding out what types of students different programs accepted and targeting programs I felt I was competitive for. Not every program looks for the same type of student. For example, many REUs (but not all, and not to the same extent) aim to support students who don't have access to certain types of research at their home universities or who are underrepresented minorities in their field. I have found lots of success from REUs gaining materials science research experience that I could not have gotten at UNC and connecting with other gender minorities in research. Programs like DOE SULIs, on the other hand, often look for the more traditionally experienced student who has enough research experience to be immediately more productive in the lab. Understanding the goals of different programs will help you both come up with a good list and tailor your applications to fit their search. Some questions to consider include:

- Does the program typically accept students in your year/with your amount of experience?
- Does the program typically accept students from R1 universities like UNC?
- Does the program state a focus on certain demographics? For example, some REUs I applied to clearly made an effort to promote women in physics which led to some great experiences in female-dominated spaces that I wouldn't otherwise have had. But, they might not be the right program to apply to if you don't fit the demographic.

## essays

REU essays are a very different beast from college essays. Your essays are your space to show the reader that you have the qualities needed to excel in a 10-week research project. That can include creativity, organization, self-motivation, etc. You can show this through discussion of previous research, class or personal projects, jobs, or other experiences.

Every REU will have a slightly different essay prompt, but I found that I could normally keep the same core essay and swap out certain sections for different REUs. In my opinion, these are some crucial elements that you should include in your essay:

- Specific research groups you are interested in: almost all REUs will have a list of professors with possible research projects for an REU student on their website. These are there for a reason. The REUs want to see that you have done your research into their program, and are applying to specific professors for a reason. Many programs will then send your application to the professors that you listed on your essay, and then those professors will choose who they want to admit--I know this was the case for my Vanderbilt and Penn State REUs.
- Explanation of why this REU will fit into your career goals. A professor generally doesn't decide to take an REU student because they want you to get a lot of research done; training an REU student requires a lot of investment from a research group and 10 weeks isn't a lot of time to get significant research output! Instead, professors often target students that have specific career goals that will motivate them to use the REU as a launching pad to a bigger career. In other words, professors want to help motivated students build careers. In particular, if you want a PhD, say that! Many REU-type programs are specifically targeted to help students prepare for grad school.

These are some elements that I included in all my essays, but that could be done differently:

- Introduction: in a few sentences, what areas of research are you interested in and why? Keep it you-specific, focusing on how your personal academic experiences have led you to these research interests.
- Paragraph explaining the skills that I learned from previous research/other experience, and how those relate directly to my suitability for that REU.

Vanderbilt University (summer after freshman year):

> As a physics and music double major, I would be incredibly grateful to apply my studies towards sustainable energy research with the VINSE REU program. My studies in physics and music have given me an appreciation of applications of physics, such as musical acoustics – last year, I completed a yearlong research project on the correlation between musician practice habits and flute harmonics. This love of physics applications, coupled with a desire to fight climate change, has led me to work towards a career in renewable energy. Following my undergraduate degree, I hope to pursue either a PhD in physics or graduate study in mechanical or electrical engineering to pursue this career path.
> 
> Given this, the REU at Vanderbilt University would be a dream! In particular, I would love to explore the work of Dr. Greg Walker or Dr. Sharon Weiss. Dr. Walker’s lab sounds fascinating, as DFT is an incredibly interesting approach to me and I would absolutely love to learn everything I can from working in this lab and would be happy to learn anything that would better prepare me before. Also, I have found that I greatly enjoy coding and using computers to solve problems, so I believe that this lab would be a wonderful experience! Dr. Weiss’ projects in nanophotonics are fascinating, although not in photovoltaics, the electronic applications of this research are exciting!
> 
> Although I have not yet joined a research group at my university, I have had significant experience in self-led AP Research and as part of a citizen science research group. Through my own acoustical research on correlations between musician practice habits and flute harmonics, I gained a lot of creative experience and confidence from designing this experiment outside of a laboratory setting, such as finding ways to deal with background noise and normalizing sample loudness. Additionally, through joining NASA’s Backyard Worlds: Planet 9 citizen science project in 2021, I learned to scan through academic literature for specific pieces of information. However, a passion that I have had throughout high school is for sustainable energy alternatives and electronics, and beginning my undergraduate research career in this area would be incredible.
> 
> One aspect of the VINSE REU program that piqued my interest was the ability to apply my class studies in a research context with exciting practical applications, such as studying creative energy solutions. In addition to completing the introductory physics series, PHYS 331 Numerical Techniques for the Sciences I (Python and additional math), math through differential equations and linear algebra, and the introductory chemistry sequence this year, I have experience in self-teaching coding and can pick up programming languages quickly. I would love the opportunity to apply these studies in this fascinating environment!
> 
> I would greatly appreciate this program because although I am a physics major at a university that I love, I am incredibly interested in photovoltaics and electrical engineering research. I am incredibly grateful for the research and class opportunities that I have at UNC, but I would also love the opportunity to learn from the amazing engineering-based research at Vanderbilt University, and I would be incredibly grateful to do this in the lens of sustainable energy or electronics research.


Yamagata University (summer after sophomore year):

> As a physics major with much experience working in computational research, I would be absolutely thrilled to expand my horizons to experimental physics in Yamagata City or Yonezawa this summer. I spent last summer working full-time at Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering REU, creating a computational method for studying heat across metal/metal oxide interfaces using molecular dynamics. My project was affiliated with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, and I particularly loved observing the impact of physics research on green projects. Additionally, I had the opportunity to learn about the kinds of nanoscale manipulation and research that are possible, through my own project and through the weekly graduate-led “nanoseminars.” These included presentations in materials, nanophotonics, and photovoltaics, and they piqued my interest in the experimental process of nanoscale research. Given this, the research areas in the Yamagata University REU are perfect: solar cells and light emitting diodes, photonics, and nanomaterials are all areas that I would love to research this summer, especially in an institution known for its work on organic LEDs. In particular, I would be interested in solar cell research.
> 
> My research experience includes the full-time REU this past summer as well as a current research position in a theoretical group studying methods of solving for thermodynamic properties of n-body systems. I believe that my varied research paths are a strength of mine in my undergraduate career: pursuing as many research paths that interest me during my undergrad as possible will prepare me to make a more informed choice when it comes time to pick an area of specialization and pursue a PhD. For this particular internship, I believe that my experiences in different research groups have given me strengths in communication and initiative. I have learned how to conduct literature reviews to find answers to questions on my own, as well as how to form specific questions to communicate with graduate students or my PI. I have also gained hard skills such as various data analysis and computational methods and the ability to pick up coding languages quickly.
> 
> I am pursuing a secondary major in music at my home institution, which is something that brings me a lot of joy. However, it means that I don’t have time to study abroad during the school year, which drew me to this REU. I studied Japanese for 5 years in middle and high school, and have always dreamed of visiting Japan. Additionally, Yamagata University is an incredible research university with so much innovation going on! The ability to spend my summer exploring both a new research focus and the Yamagata Prefecture would be incredible, and I would be honored to have the opportunity.


Penn State (summer after junior year):

> I came into college looking for sustainability research: my first experience was an REU studying heat across metal/metal oxide interfaces using molecular dynamics, as part of a larger effort to create a cleaner method for catalytic cracking. I enjoyed the theory but wanted to also explore experimental research, so my next experience was a PIRE clean energy program in a thin film electrochemistry lab in Yamagata, Japan. When I returned home, I joined a biophysics lab and began characterizing 3D printed microscopes and designing a low cost build-it-yourself molecular printer to attach to the microscopes. I do love how intimately I now know my microscope (her name is Circe, she likes to be difficult but I still love her), but I miss applying my physics theory classes to my research! My interests lie in materials physics, which I have actively sought out research experiences outside of my home university to pursue.
>  
> I am interested in two sides of materials research at Penn State. On the experimental side, the Kenneth Knappenberger group is very interesting to me! While in Yamagata, I met a biology professor studying photosynthesis who got me thinking about light-matter interactions from a new lens. Between the fluorescence microscopy in my current research to learning about photosynthesis, femtosecond physics, and nonlinear optics on my own, I’ve learned that there are so many fascinating facets of light-matter interactions! I would absolutely love the chance to learn about any of the experimental techniques that the Knappenberger group is pioneering this summer. On the computational side, I am interested in the work of Vincent Crespi, Zhen Bi, and Long-Qing Chen. I investigated solid state systems using molecular dynamics during my first REU, and was always fascinated and pretty lost to hear my graduate student advisor talk about his own work in DFT. With two more years of physics theory under my belt, I’d love to return to computational materials physics and get a shot at first principles calculations. I miss the theoretical thinking involved in creating simulations, and I would love to engage with some of the fascinating computational research going on at Penn State!
> 
> Along my research journey, I’ve picked up many skills that have prepared me well for an experience like this REU: I have learned to take initiative, organize my thoughts in a lab notebook, and use group meetings as a tool to keep myself in check. I have learned to ask and answer my own questions in many different contexts through literature review, as well as the importance of communicating questions with graduate students or my PI. I’ve gained hard skills like data analysis, computational methods, computer-aided design, and various electrochemistry lab instruments and have learned to come in each morning and write a to-do list for the day that will fit into a larger, months-long project. All of this gives me a solid foundation to build a summer-long project at Penn State.
> 
> As I’ve strayed a little bit from the sustainability and thin film research that I came into college wanting to pursue, I believe that the Penn State REU would help me reconcile my research path with a sustainable future. Additionally, the type of materials research that I could pursue at Penn State is wildly different from what I could do at my home university, which I believe would be an invaluable experience for the summer before graduate school. I would be honored to have the opportunity to expand my research horizons one last time in undergrad!  
